This Document is a subset of the complete document taken from the Squish
Developers Kit Version 2.0


                       COPYRIGHT AND DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTIONS

All of the source code, header files and documentation within the Squish
Developers  Kit is copyright 1991-1994 by SCI Communications. All rights
reserved.

                           SQUISH FILE FORMAT SPECIFICATION

This  section  describes  the physical file  layout  of a Squish message
base.  This  is intended as a  reference  for developers who are writing
their  own  Squish-compatible  programs. For  an  overview of the Squish
message   base,   see   the  section   of   SQUISH.PRN  entitled  "Using
Squish-Format Message Areas".

While  the  Squish MsgAPI library  provides  a standardized interface to
Squish  and  *.MSG  bases  for  C  programmers,  authors  who  use other
languages  may  need  to  access  Squish  bases  directly.  This section
describes the implementation details of the Squish file format.


          Squish Philosophy

A  standard Squish base consists of two files: a message data file and a
message  index file. Both files have the  same prefix, but the data file
has  an  extension of ".sqd", while the  index  file has an extension of
".sqi".

From an overall point of view, the Squish data file consists of messages
stored  in a doubly-linked list. The  Squish data file includes a header
that  contains  pointers  to the first and  last  frames in the area, in
addition to other area-specific information.

In  the  data file, a "frame" is  used  to hold an individual message. A
frame  consists of a frame header (which contains links to the prior and
next  messages),  followed  by  the  optional  message  header,  control
information and message body fields.

This  "linked list of frames" approach is  ideal for a BBS message base.
Almost all message base access is sequential, starting from a particular
offset,  and  reading  or writing until the  end  of the message base is
reached.  Since  each frame header contains  the offset of the prior and
next  messages,  no disk accesses are  required to find the preceding or
following messages.

The  index  file  is a flat array  of  Squish Index (SQIDX) records. The
index  file  is used primarily for  performing random access look-ups by
message number.

Unlike other message base formats, the Squish base is only loosely based
on  the concept of "message numbers".  While all messages have a message
number, these numbers can change at any time. By definition, the message
numbers  in a Squish base always range  from 1 to the highest message in
the  area.  Consequently, there are no  "gaps"  in message numbers, so a
Squish message area never needs to be renumbered.

While this makes it easy to scan through all of the messages in an area,
this also makes it difficult to find one specific message. Consequently,
the concept of a "unique message identifier" or (UMSGID) is introduced.

When  a  message  is  created, it  is  assigned  a  32-bit UMSGID. These
identifiers  are  unique  and NEVER  CHANGE.  Unique message numbers are
never  "renumbered",  so once a UMSGID of  a message is obtained, it can
always  be used to find the current message number of the given message,
no matter how many messages have been added or deleted in the interim.


          Squish Data Types

The  following  integral  types  are  used  in  the  Squish  file format
definitions:

          Type      Size      Description
          char      1 byte    A one-byte unsigned character.

          word      2 bytes   A two-byte unsigned integer.

          sword     2 bytes   A two-byte signed integer.

          dword     4 bytes   A four-byte unsigned integer.

          FOFS      4 bytes   A  four-byte unsigned integer.   This type is
                              used to  store offsets  of frames  within the
                              Squish data file.

          UMSGID    4 bytes   A four-byte unsigned  integer.  This  type is
                              used to store unique message  identifiers for
                              Squish messages.

The  types  above are stored in  the  standard Intel "backwords" format,
with  the  least  significant  byte being  stored  first,  and  the most
significant byte being stored last.

          A two-byte integer containing 0x1234 would be stored as follows:

               Offset    Value
               0         0x34
               1         0x12

          A  four-byte integer  containing  0x12345678 would  be stored  as
          follows:

               Offset    Value
               0         0x78
               1         0x56
               2         0x34
               3         0x12

          The  Squish  file format also uses  a  number of abstract data
types:

The  SCOMBO type is used for  describing a message date/time stamp. This
structure has the following format:

          Name      Type      Ofs  Description
          date      word      0    DOS bitmapped date value.  This field is
                                   used to store a message date.

                                   The first five bits represent the day of
                                   the month.  (A value of 1 represents the
                                   first of the month.)

                                   The next four bits indicate the month of
                                   the year. (1=January; 12=December.)

                                   The  remaining  seven bits  indicate the
                                   year (relative to 1980).

          time      word      2    DOS  bitmapped time  value.   This field
                                   used to store a message time.

                                   The first five bits indicate the seconds
                                   value,  divided by  two.   This  implies
                                   that all  message  dates and  times  get
                                   rounded  to a  multiple of  two seconds.
                                   (0  seconds  = 0;  16  seconds  = 8;  58
                                   seconds = 29.)

                                   The next six  bits represent the minutes
                                   value.

                                   The  remaining  five bits  represent the
                                   hour value, using a 24-hour clock.

                    Total:    4 bytes

          The  NETADDR  type  is  used  for  describing  a  FidoNet network
          address.  This structure has the following format:

          Name      Type      Offset    Description
          zone      word      0         FidoNet zone number.

          net       word      2         FidoNet net number.

          node      word      4         FidoNet node number.

          point     word      6         FidoNet  point  number.     If  the
                                        system  is not a  point, this field
                                        should be assigned a value of zero.
                    Total:    8 bytes

In  addition,  to  describe  an array  of  a  given  type, the "type[n]"
notation  is  used.  For example, "char[6]"  represents  an array of six
contiguous  characters.  Likewise, "UMSGID[12]"  represents  an array of
twelve UMSGID types.


          Data File Format

          The Squish data file consists of two major sections:

          1)   A fixed-length area  header, stored at the  beginning of the
               file.

          2)   A variable-length  heap that comprises the rest of the file.
               This part of the file is used for storing message text.

The  area  header  stores  pointers to the  head  and  tail of two major
"chains"  of messages; the message chain and the free chain. The message
chain  is used to find all active messages in an area. The free chain is
used  for storing the locations of deleted messages, such that space can
be reused at a later point in time.

The  Squish  data file always contains  a  copy of the following _sqbase
structure at file offset 0:

          Name                Type      Offset    Description
          len                 word      0         Length  of   the  _sqbase
                                                  structure.

          reserved            word      2         Reserved for future use.

          num_msg             dword     4         Number  of   messages  in
                                                  this  Squish base.   This
                                                  should always be equal to
                                                  the value of the high_msg
                                                  field.

          high_msg            dword     8         Highest message number in
                                                  this  Squish base.   This
                                                  should always be equal to
                                                  the value  of the num_msg
                                                  field.

          skip_msg            dword     12        When        automatically
                                                  deleting  messages,  this
                                                  field indicates  that the
                                                  first  skip_msg  messages
                                                  in the area should not be
                                                  deleted.   (If max_msg=50
                                                  and    skip_msg=2,   this
                                                  means  that  the  writing
                                                  program    should   start
                                                  deleting  from  the third
                                                  message    whenever   the
                                                  total    message    count
                                                  exceeds 50 messages.)

          high_water          dword     16        The high water marker for
                                                  this  area,  stored as  a
                                                  UMSGID.    This field  is
                                                  used  in  EchoMail  areas
                                                  only.   This contains the
                                                  UMSGID  of   the  highest
                                                  message that  was scanned
                                                  by   EchoMail  processing
                                                  software.

          uid                 dword     20        This  field  contains the
                                                  UMSGID to  be assigned to
                                                  the next  message created
                                                  in this area.

          base                char[80]  24        Name  and   path  of  the
                                                  Squish base, as an ASCIIZ
                                                  string, not including the
                                                  extension.  This field is
                                                  optional  and  will   not
                                                  necessarily be filled out
                                                  by all applications.  (If
                                                  this    field    is   not
                                                  supported,  it should  be
                                                  initialized to ASCII 0.)

          begin_frame         FOFS      104       Offset of the first frame
                                                  in the message chain.

          last_frame          FOFS      108       Offset of  the last frame
                                                  in the message chain.

          free_frame          FOFS      112       Offset of the first frame
                                                  in the free chain.

          last_free_frame     FOFS      116       Offset   of   the    last
                                                  message   in   the   free
                                                  chain.

          end_frame           FOFS      120       Offset   of  end-of-file.
                                                  Applications  will append
                                                  messages  to  the  Squish
                                                  file from this point.

          max_msg             dword     124       Maximum     number     of
                                                  messages to store in this
                                                  area.      When   writing
                                                  messages,    applications
                                                  should dynamically delete
                                                  messages  to   make  sure
                                                  that    no    more   than
                                                  max_msgs  exist  in  this
                                                  area.

          keep_days           word      128       Maximum age  (in days) of
                                                  messages  in  this  area.
                                                  This    field    is   not
                                                  normally      used     by
                                                  applications.    However,
                                                  it is used by SQPACK when
                                                  performing a message area
                                                  pack.

          sz_sqhdr            word      130       Size    of   the    SQHDR
                                                  structure.            For
                                                  compatibility with future
                                                  versions  of  the  Squish
                                                  file format, applications
                                                  should use  this value as
                                                  the  size  of  the  SQHDR
                                                  structure,   instead   of
                                                  using     a     hardcoded
                                                  "sizeof(SQHDR)" value.

          reserved            char[124] 132       Reserved for future use.

                              Total:    256 bytes

To  examine  the  messages in a  Squish  base,  the application needs to
follow  the message chain. To do this, start with the begin_frame and/or
end_frame fields. These fields contain the offsets of the first and last
frames (respectively) in the message base.

A frame in the message chain consists of a Squish Frame Header structure
(SQHDR),   followed   by  the  XMSG   message  header,  message  control
information, and message body.

A  frame  in the free chain consists  of  a SQHDR structure only. A free
frame does not necessarily contain a message.

          A SQHDR structure always has the following format:

          Name           Type      Ofs  Description
          id             dword     0    The  frame   identifier  signature.
                                        This field must always be  set to a
                                        value of 0xAFAE4453.

          next_frame     FOFS      4    Frame offset of the next  frame, or
                                        0 if this is the last frame.

          prev_frame     FOFS      8    Frame offset of the prior frame, or
                                        0 if this is the first frame.

          frame_length   dword     12   Amount of space  ALLOCATED for  the
                                        frame, not including the space used
                                        by the SQHDR itself.

          msg_length     dword     16   Amount of space USED in this frame,
                                        including  the  size  of  the  XMSG
                                        header,  the  control  information,
                                        and the message  text.  This  field
                                        does  NOT include  the size  of the
                                        SQHDR itself.

          clen           dword     20   Length  of the  control information
                                        field in this frame.

          frame_type     word      24   This field  can contain one  of the
                                        following frame type values:

                                             0    Normal frame.  This frame
                                                  contains an  XMSG header,
                                                  followed  by  the message
                                                  control  information  and
                                                  the message body.  Normal
                                                  frames  should  only   be
                                                  encountered          when
                                                  processing   the   normal
                                                  message chain.

                                             1    Free  frame.   This frame
                                                  has been  deleted, but it
                                                  can   be  reused.     The
                                                  amount of available space
                                                  in the frame is  given by
                                                  the  frame_length  field.
                                                  Free  frames should  only
                                                  be    encountered    when
                                                  processing    the    free
                                                  chain.

                                             2    LZSS  frame.   This frame
                                                  type   is  reserved   for
                                                  future use.

                                             3    Frame update.   The frame
                                                  is   being   updated   by
                                                  another  task.   This  is
                                                  only  a  transient  frame
                                                  type;  it indicates  that
                                                  the  frame should  not be
                                                  manipulated   by  another
                                                  task.

                                             All  other   frame  types  are
                                             reserved for future use.

          reserved       word      26   Reserved for future use.

                         Total:    28 bytes


For  a normal frame type, the XMSG header immediately follows the Squish
frame header. The XMSG structure has the following format:

          Name           Type      Ofs  Description

          attr           dword     0    Message  attributes.    This  is  a
                                        combination  of  any  of  the  MSG*
                                        attributes.  (See below.)

          from           char[36]  4    Name  of  the  user who  originated
                                        this message.

          to             char[36]  40   Name  of  the  user  to  whom  this
                                        message is addressed.

          subject        char[72]  76   Message subject.

          orig           NETADDR   148  Originating network address of this
                                        message.

          dest           NETADDR   156  Destination network address of this
                                        message.  (Used  for netmail  areas
                                        only.)

          date_written   SCOMBO    164  Date that the message was written.

          date_arrived   SCOMBO    168  Date that the message was placed in
                                        this Squish area.

          utc_ofs        sword     172  The  message  writer's offset  from
                                        UTC, in minutes.   Currently,  this
                                        field is not used.

          replyto        UMSGID    174  If  this message  is a  reply, this
                                        field  gives  the  UMSGID   of  the
                                        original message.   Otherwise, this
                                        field is given a value of 0.

          replies        UMSGID[9] 178  If any replies for this message are
                                        present,   this  array   lists  the
                                        UMSGIDs   of   up  to   nine  reply
                                        messages.

          umsgid         UMSGID    214  The UMSGID  of this message.   THIS
                                        FIELD  IS ONLY VALID  IF THE MSGUID
                                        BIT  IS  SET IN  THE  "ATTR" FIELD.
                                        Older Squish programs do not always
                                        set this field, so its contents can
                                        only be trusted  if the MSGUID  bit
                                        is set.

          __ftsc_date    char[20]  218  FTS-0001  compatible date.   Squish
                                        applications should not access this
                                        field directly.  This field is used
                                        exclusively by tossers and scanners
                                        for  preserving the  original ASCII
                                        message date.   Squish applications
                                        should  use  the  binary  dates  in
                                        date_written  and  date_arrived  to
                                        retrieve the message date.
                         Total:    238 bytes

          Any  of the  following bitmasks can  be used  in the  XMSG "attr"
          field:

          Attribute      Value          Description
          MSGPRIVATE     0x00000001     The message is private.

          MSGCRASH       0x00000002     The  message  is  given  a  "crash"
                                        flavour  when  packed.   When  both
                                        MSGCRASH   and  MSGHOLD   are  both
                                        enabled,  the  message  is given  a
                                        "direct" flavour.

          MSGREAD        0x00000004     The  message has  been read  by the
                                        addressee.

          MSGSENT        0x00000008     The  message  has  been packed  and
                                        prepared  for   transmission  to  a
                                        remote system.

          MSGFILE        0x00000010     The  message  has a  file attached.
                                        The filename is given in the "subj"
                                        field.

          MSGFWD         0x00000020     The  message  is in-transit;  it is
                                        not addressed to one of our primary
                                        addresses.

          MSGORPHAN      0x00000040     The  message  is  orphaned.     The
                                        message  destination address  could
                                        not be found in the nodelist.

          MSGKILL        0x00000080     The message should be  deleted from
                                        the  local message base  when it is
                                        packed.

          MSGLOCAL       0x00000100     The  message   originated  on  this
                                        system.   This flag must be present
                                        on  all  locally-generated  netmail
                                        for Squish to function properly.

          MSGHOLD        0x00000200     The  message  should  be   given  a
                                        "hold" flavour when  packed.   When
                                        combined  with  the MSGCRASH  flag,
                                        the  message  is  given a  "direct"
                                        flavour.

          MSGXX2         0x00000400     Reserved for future use.

          MSGFRQ         0x00000800     The message is a file request.  The
                                        filename  is  given  in the  "subj"
                                        field.

          MSGRRQ         0x00001000     A  receipt  is  requested.     (Not
                                        supported by Squish.)

          MSGCPT         0x00002000     This  message is  a receipt  for an
                                        earlier MSGRRQ request.

          MSGARQ         0x00004000     An audit trail  is requested.  (Not
                                        supported by Squish.)

          MSGURQ         0x00008000     This message is an  update request.
                                        The filename is given in the "subj"
                                        field.

          MSGSCANNED     0x00010000     This  echomail   message  has  been
                                        scanned out to other systems.

          MSGUID         0x00020000     The  "uid"  field contains  a valid
                                        UMSGID for this message.


          Index File Format

The  index  file  provides random access  capability  for a Squish base.
Given  a message number, the index file  can be used to quickly find the
frame offset for that message.

Similarly,  given a UMSGID, the index file  can also be used to find the
message number and/or the frame offset for the message.

The  Squish  index file is an  array of Squish Index (SQIDX) structures.
Each  SQIDX  structure  corresponds  to an  active  message.  For a base
containing 'n' messages, there are at least 'n' SQIDX structures. (There
may  also be extra SQIDX frames at the  end of the index file, but these
will be initialized with invalid values, as described below.)

The SQIDX for the first message is stored at offset 0. The SQIDX for the
second  message is stored at offset 12.  The SQIDX for the third message
is stored at offset 24. (and so on)

          The Squish Index structure (SQIDX) has the following format:

          Name      Type      Ofs  Description

          ofs       FOFS      0    Offset of the frame for this message.  A
                                   value  of  0  is  used  to  indicate  an
                                   invalid message.

          umsgid    UMSGID    4    Unique message ID for  this message.   A
                                   value of 0xffffffff  is used to indicate
                                   an invalid message.

                                   The umsgid field  must always be greater
                                   than  the umsgid field  of the preceding
                                   SQIDX structure.   UMSGIDs are  assigned
                                   serially, so  this will normally  be the
                                   case.  (A binary search is  performed on
                                   the  index file to translate UMSGIDs, so
                                   the  umsgid field  of the  SQIDX headers
                                   must  always  be  stored   in  ascending
                                   order.)

          hash      dword     8    The low 31 bits  of this field contain a
                                   hash the "To:"  field for this  message.
                                   (See below for the  hash function.)  The
                                   high bit is set to 1 if the MSGREAD flag
                                   is  enabled  in  the corresponding  XMSG
                                   header.

                    Total:    12 bytes


The following hash function is used to calculate the "hash" field of the
SQIDX structure. All variables are 32-bit unless otherwise noted:

               Set "hash" to a value of 0

               For each 8-bit character "ch" in the To: field, repeat:

                    -    Shift "hash" left by four bytes.
                    -    Convert "ch" to lowercase
                    -    Increment the hash by the ASCII value of "ch"

                    -    Set "g" to the value of "hash"
                    -    Perform a  bitwise AND  on  "g", using  a mask  of
                         0xf0000000.

                    -    If "g" is non-zero:

                         -    Perform a bitwise OR on "hash" with the value
                              of "g".
                         -    Shift "g" right by 24 bits.
                         -    Perform a bitwise OR on "hash" with the value
                              of "g".

               Perform   a  bitwise  AND  on  "hash"  with  a  value  of
                0x7fffffff.

          The following C function can be used to calculate such a hash:

               #include <ctype.h>

               unsigned long SquishHash(unsigned char *f)
               {
                    unsigned long hash=0;
                    unsigned long g;
                    char *p;

                    for (p=f; *p; p++)
                    {
                         hash=(hash << 4) + (unsigned long)tolower(*p);

                         if ((g=(hash & 0xf0000000L)) != 0L)
                         {
                              hash |= g >> 24;
                              hash |= g;
                         }
                    }
                    /* Strip off high bit */

                    return (hash & 0x7fffffffLu);
               }

--- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------